THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
ACT NO. 45 OF 1860

PREAMBLE

An Act to provide a general Penal Code for India.

WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code for India; It is hereby enacted as follows:

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

Section 1. Title and extent of operation of the Code
This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Section 2. Punishment of offences committed within India
Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.

Section 3. Punishment of offences committed beyond India
Any person liable, by any Indian law, to be tried for an offence committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been committed within India.

Section 4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences
The provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by—
(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be.

CHAPTER II
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS

Section 6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions
Throughout this Code every definition of an offence, every penal provision, and every illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood subject to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled "General Exceptions," though those exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or illustration.

Section 7. Sense of expression once explained
Every expression which is explained in any part of this Code, is used in every part of this Code in conformity with the explanation.

Section 8. Gender
The pronoun "he" and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male or female.

Section 9. Number
Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and words importing the plural number include the singular number.

Section 10. "Man." "Woman"
The word "man" denotes a male human being of any age; the word "woman" denotes a female human being of any age.

Section 11. "Person"
The word "person" includes any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not.

Section 12. "Public"
The word "public" includes any class of the public or any community.

CHAPTER III
OF PUNISHMENTS

Section 53. Punishments
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code are—
First.—Death.
Secondly.—Imprisonment for life.
Thirdly.—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour.
(2) Simple.
Fourthly.—Forfeiture of property.
Fifthly.—Fine.

Section 54. Commutation of sentence of death
In every case in which sentence of death shall have been passed, the appropriate Government may, without the consent of the offender, commute the punishment for any other punishment provided by this Code.

Section 55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life
In every case in which sentence of imprisonment for life shall have been passed, the appropriate Government may, without the consent of the offender, commute the punishment for imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

CHAPTER IV
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

Section 76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.

Section 79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it.

Section 80. Accident in doing a lawful act
Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution.

Section 81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.

Section 82. Act of a child under seven years of age
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.

Section 83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.

Section 84. Act of a person of unsound mind
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.

Section 85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law: provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.

CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

Section 299. Culpable homicide
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Illustrations:
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z believing the ground to be firm, treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed culpable homicide.

Section 300. Murder
Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or—
Secondly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or—
Thirdly.—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or—
Fourthly.—If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such bodily injury as aforesaid.

Section 302. Punishment for murder
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.

Section 320. Grievous hurt
The following kinds of hurt only are designated as "grievous":
First.—Emasculation.
Secondly.—Permanent privation of powers of any member or joint.
Thirdly.—Destruction of powers of any member or joint.
Fourthly.—Permanent disfiguration of head or face.
Fifthly.—Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth.
Sixthly.—Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer, during the space of twenty days, to be unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.

Section 321. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 375. Rape
A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions:—
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.—Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband, and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.—With her consent, when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which she gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years of age.

Section 376. Punishment for rape
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 378. Theft
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.

Section 379. Punishment for theft
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 415. Cheating
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".

Section 420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.