SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA (SEBI) REGULATIONS
SEBI (LISTING OBLIGATIONS AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS) REGULATIONS, 2015

PREAMBLE
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 30 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, read with sub-section (1) of section 11A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, the Board hereby makes the following regulations.

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Regulation 1. Short title and commencement
(1) These regulations may be called the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015.
(2) These regulations shall come into force on the 1st day of December, 2015.

Regulation 2. Definitions
(1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(c) "listed entity" means an entity whose securities are listed on a recognised stock exchange;
(d) "market capitalisation" means the market value of the total issued shares of the listed entity as per the closing price on the recognised stock exchange;
(f) "promoter" and "promoter group" shall have the same meaning as defined in the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2018;

CHAPTER III - BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND COMMITTEES

Regulation 15. Composition of board of directors
(1) The board of directors of every listed entity shall have an optimum combination of executive and non-executive directors with at least one woman director and not less than fifty percent of the board of directors comprising non-executive directors.

Regulation 18. Audit committee
(1) Listed entity shall constitute an audit committee and such committee shall consist of a minimum of three directors with independent directors forming a majority.
(2) The chairperson of audit committee shall be an independent director.
(3) All members of audit committee shall be financially literate and at least one member shall have accounting or related financial management expertise.

CHAPTER V - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS

Regulation 23. Related party transactions
(1) All related party transactions shall require prior approval of the audit committee.
(2) All material related party transactions shall require approval of the shareholders through resolution and the related parties shall not vote to approve such resolutions.
(3) A transaction with a related party shall be considered material if the transaction exceeds ten percent of the annual consolidated turnover of the listed entity.

CHAPTER VI - DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS

Regulation 29. Disclosure of events or information
The listed entity shall first disclose to stock exchange(s) of all events, changes or information as specified in Part A of Schedule III as soon as reasonably possible but not later than twenty four hours from the occurrence of the event or information.

CHAPTER VII - FINANCIAL RESULTS

Regulation 33. Financial results
(1) The listed entity shall submit to the stock exchange within forty five days of the end of each quarter other than the last quarter and within sixty days of the end of the last quarter, the financial results in the formats specified.

CHAPTER XII - PENALTIES

Regulation 58. Penalty for non-compliance
(1) Without prejudice to action under the Act, SEBI Act, 1992 or any other law for the time being in force, if a listed entity fails to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations, it shall be liable to penalty as prescribed under regulation 59.

Regulation 59. Penalty
For any violation of the provisions of these regulations, the recognised stock exchange shall levy fines/penalty as may be prescribed by the recognised stock exchange from time to time and approved by the Board:
Provided that the quantum of penalty shall not exceed rupees one crore per violation.