CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
ACT NO. 2 OF 1974

PREAMBLE
An Act to provide for the Code of Criminal Procedure; Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement
(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Section 2. Definitions
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bailable offence" means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and "non-bailable offence" means any other offence;
(b) "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant;
(c) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report;

CHAPTER V - PROCEEDINGS IN PROSECUTIONS

Section 154. Information in cognizable cases
(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf.

Section 161. Examination of witnesses by police
(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.

Section 173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation
(1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay.
(2) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government.

CHAPTER IX - ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS

Section 125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents
(1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, at such monthly rate not exceeding ten thousand rupees in the aggregate, as such Magistrate thinks fit.