THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
ACT NO. 45 OF 1860

PREAMBLE
An Act to provide a general Penal Code for India.

CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION

Section 1. Title and extent of operation of the Code
This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Section 2. Punishment of offences committed within India
Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.

CHAPTER III - OF PUNISHMENTS

Section 53. Punishments
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code are—
First.—Death.
Secondly.—Imprisonment for life.
Thirdly.—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour.
(2) Simple.
Fourthly.—Forfeiture of property.
Fifthly.—Fine.

CHAPTER IV - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

Section 76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.

Section 82. Act of a child under seven years of age
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.

Section 84. Act of a person of unsound mind
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.

CHAPTER XVI - OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

Section 299. Culpable homicide
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Section 300. Murder
Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death.

Section 302. Punishment for murder
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 375. Rape
A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions:
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.—Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested in fear of death or of hurt.

Section 376. Punishment for rape
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 378. Theft
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.

Section 420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.