RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005
ACT NO. 22 OF 2005

PREAMBLE
An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority.

WHEREAS the Constitution of India has established democratic Republic;
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the governed;

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement
(1) This Act may be called the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Section 2. Definitions
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(e) "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;
(g) "public authority" means any authority or body or institution of self-government established or constituted by or under the Constitution;
(i) "right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority;

CHAPTER II - RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES

Section 3. Right to information
Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to information.

Section 4. Obligations of public authorities
(1) Every public authority shall—
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a manner and the form which facilitates the right to information under this Act;
(b) publish within one hundred and twenty days from the enactment of this Act, the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties;

Section 6. Request for obtaining information
(1) A person, who desires to obtain any information under this Act, shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official language of the area in which the application is being made, accompanying such fee as may be prescribed, to the Public Information Officer of the concerned public authority.

Section 7. Disposal of request
(1) The Public Information Officer shall, as expeditiously as possible and in any case within thirty days of the receipt of the request, either provide the information on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9.